Ferdinand of Bulgaria could hardly have differed more radically from his allies, the kings of Serbia and Montenegro. No one would ever have described him as an unpretentious mountain patriarch. On the contrary, he was the most outré crowned head in Europe.

Tsar Ferdinand was fond of referring to himself as the latest Bourbon King. That was a characteristic piece of self-dramatisation. His mother had indeed been a Bourbon or, more precisely, a Bourbon–Orleans: her father had been the last Bourbon to reign in France – Louis Philippe, the Citizen King. But Ferdinand's father had been a Coburg: one of that tribe of princes of the house of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha who, by their judicious marriages into the leading royal families, had prompted Bismarck to refer scathingly to Coburg as 'the stud farm of Europe'.

Whatever else Ferdinand might have inherited from the Coburgs, it was not their good looks. In appearance, he was almost all Bourbon. His doting and ambitious mother, Princess Clementine of Bourbon-Orleans, always maintained that not one of the living descendants of King Louis XIV resembled the Sun King more closely than did Ferdinand. Fifty-one in 1912, Ferdinand was a tall, portly, straight-backed, regally moustached and bearded figure whose most prominent feature was his huge Bourbon nose. Der Naseferdinand – the Nose-Ferdinand – was Wilhelm II's nickname for him.

'An ardent lover of beauty,' says Crown Princess Marie of Romania, 'Uncle Ferdinand was well aware that his nose was too prominent a feature.' Did she not think, he once asked her, that with his tiny eyes and his nose like a trunk, he looked like an elephant? 'But, my dear niece,' he hastened to add, 'I also have all the sagacity of that venerable animal.'

If Tsar Ferdinand had the nose, and the sagacity, of an elephant, he certainly had none of an elephant's ponderousness. On the contrary, he was the most amusing, irreverent and sarcastic coversationalist in any court in Europe. He dressed with great panache. No monarch, not even Wilhelm II, could cram more medals and orders on to a tunic. With his passion for precious stones, he covered his pale, long-nailed fingers with exotically jewelled rings; about his neck he always wore a gem-encrusted cross on a silver chain. His whole air was artistic, affected, sybaritic, decadent.

'If I ever feel tired or depressed, I have only to look at a bunch of violets to become myself again,' was the sort of remark guaranteed to startle his less worldly listeners.

The choice, by the Bulgarian government, in 1887, of this foppish prince as ruler of the recently created but still Turkish-dominated state of Bulgaria had sent a ripple of astonishment through the courts of Europe. 'He is totally unfit,' telegraphed an agitated Queen Victoria to her prime minister, 'delicate, eccentric and effeminate . . . Should be stopped at once.' And Lady Paget, wife of the British ambassador in Vienna, reported that 'his affectations are innumerable. He wears bracelets and powders his face. He sleeps in pink surah nightgowns trimmed with Valenciennes lace. His constitution is so delicate and his nerves so finely strung, that he only consults ladies' doctors.'

Yet to the amazement of every one – other than his redoubtable mother, the widowed Princess Clementine – the effete Prince Ferdinand not only accepted the Bulgarian challenge but made a brilliant success of his reign. For the truth was that behind that decorative façade lay a very shrewd mind. Ferdinand of Bulgaria proved himself to be far more intelligent, astute, unscrupulous and tenacious than he had ever been given credit for. That languid manner masked an iron resolve. Before many years had passed, he was being hailed as 'the new Machiavelli'. It was a description that pleased him inordinately. He would probably not even have minded that other, even less complimentary nickname, 'Foxy Ferdy'.

Gradually, from being the mere reigning prince of an impoverished and barely recognised country, Ferdinand won the official acceptance and grudging respect of Europe's leading monarchs. And finally, in 1908, taking advantage of the fact that the rest of Europe was about to be distracted by Austria's annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, he boldly threw off Turkish suzerainty and proclaimed himself Tsar of a fully independent Bulgaria.

His coup infuriated many of his fellow sovereigns. Nicholas II of Russia bitterly resented the fact that Ferdinand had styled himself 'Tsar': he called it 'the act of a megalomaniac'. Wilhelm II was no less resentful. How dare Ferdinand elevate himself to the same plane as the rest of Europe's major sovereigns?

But however much Ferdinand might be resented or scoffed at abroad, he was generally appreciated at home. And the growing political and material stature of his country was reflected in his way of life. Convinced of the international advantages of a brilliant court, Ferdinand indulged his taste for luxury, splendour and ceremonial to the full. Always obsessed with such things as rank, precedence, titles, orders and decorations, he organised his court along the most punctilious lines.

What he was hoping to recreate was the elegance and ritual, not of other contemporary European courts, but of the courts of his illustrious Bourbon ancestors. Before long, the palace in Sofia had become renowned for its stylishness.

'Entering the Palace,' writes Meriel Buchanan, daughter of the British minister in Sofia, 'one was greeted by a company of the [Tsar's] bodyguard, who stood on every step of the wide staircase, gorgeous in their scarlet, silver-braided uniforms, with the grey astrakan cap and the eagle's feather held in a jewelled clasp. Ushered into the white and gold room, one waited for the Tsar's entry before going on to the enormous dining-hall with its big horseshoe table covered with wonderful flowers. One ate off priceless china, gold and silver plates; the service was faultless, the food perfect; a concealed band played loud enough to cover any lull in the conversation, but never too loud to drown it. The glitter of decorations, the medley of uniforms . . . all these made a picture that was full of colour, a little unreal and fantastic, and gave one the feeling that one was on a stage, taking part in a musical comedy or a romance of Ruritania . . . '

To the lushness of this royal setting, Ferdinand could always be relied upon to provide a few more bizarre touches. The entrance hall to the palace was sprayed with pine essence. His study was decorated in that most modish of fin de siècle colours, mauve. The palace chapel, heavy with the scent of massed flowers and sweet incense, was kept at hot-house temperature. The holy water stoop was filled with violets.

In spite of being the ruler of an Orthodox country, Ferdinand had remained a Catholic. But his Catholicism, like that of the Tsaritsa Alexandra of Russia's Orthodoxy, was of a particularly flamboyant variety. He, too, was only too ready to steep himself in the shadowy fringes of religion: to merge it with all the manifestations of the Decadent Movement – spiritualism, clairvoyance, the occult. To him, religion and superstition were intertwined.

His country palaces and houses, whether overlooking the Black Sea or set among Bulgaria's spectacular mountains, were surrounded by beautiful gardens. Ferdinand was a passionate and knowledgeable gardener; few things gave him more pleasure than to stroll, stick in hand, among those banks of rhododendrons or terraces of roses or through his conservatories, stocked with exotic plants from all over the world. Seriously interested in the natural sciences, he wrote learned studies on birds and animals. 'The tiniest rock plant could thrill him for hours,' claims one of his mother's ladies-in-waiting.

Not all his pursuits were quite so erudite. Ferdinand had a taste for handsome young men, provided they were blond. Any muscular young soldier who happened to catch the Tsar's gimlet eye was quite likely to be appointed a palace orderly; any square-jawed chauffeur ('goodness, all those chauffeurs!' sighed one palace intimate) would find himself driving his monarch into the woods for a little dalliance on the pine needles. Ferdinand was said to have been a frequent visitor to that paradise for rich turn-of-the-century homosexuals, the island of Capri.

Yet, a Coburg to his fingertips, Ferdinand did not allow sexual preferences to stand in the way of royal obligations. For the sake of his dynasty and his country he married, not only once, but twice. His first wife, Princess Marie Louise of Bourbon-Parma, on whom he had never set eyes until the day they became engaged, was a long-nosed creature with quiet manners and a kindly nature. Having dutifully borne her husband four children, including an heir, Prince Boris, Marie Louise died, at the age of twenty-nine, in 1899.

Ferdinand did not think of marrying again until his adored mother, Princess Clementine, died in 1907. His second wife was chosen in a no more romantic manner than his first. He did not, he explained frankly to the friend whom he had commissioned to find him a consort, 'want a wife who would expect affection or even get attention'.5 Princess Eleonore von Reuss-Köstritz, whom he married in 1908, certainly got neither. A plain but practical woman, Princess Eleonore seems to have been fully informed about what were delicately referred to as her husband's 'foibles'. Even so, she must have been acutely embarrassed when, on being entertained by King Carol of Romania on the way back to Sofia after their wedding, her outraged husband insisted that the double bedroom assigned to them be exchanged for separate quarters.

References:

Aronson, Theo. 1986. Crowns in Conflict : The Triumph and the Tragedy of European Monarchy 1910-1918. London: Murray.

Author of The real Kaiser. 1916. Ferdinand of Bulgaria: The Amazing Career of a Shoddy Czar. London: A. Melrose. Obtaind via [Gutenberg](https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/48330)